{{:cubase:roomworks.png|}}====== RoomWorks ======

<WRAP group>
<WRAP right column 35%>
[{{ :cubase:roomworks.png?direct | RoomWorks in Cubase}}]
</WRAP>

<WRAP columns>
Cubase's RoomWorks is a reverb effect provided by Steinberg in their toolkit of stock plug-ins. Reverb is known for being a highly versatile effect and has uses ranging from making minor frequency adjustments on objects as small as individual midi notes to breathing a bit more life into a track during the mastering process. Apart from your typical use of reverb, adding a lot more character to a sound you are working on, there are also numerous ways that you can tweak certain parameters to add very specific, unique, dimensions throughout the process of your audio engineering. Many popular reverb products exist on the market and, while not all of us can afford an Eventide, we are easily able to work with the less expensive, digital manifestations that are made readily available to us—either through open-source solutions, freeware solutions, or commercial solutions. As reverb is such a staple effect in the studio today, it is included in many of the popular digital audio workstation's stock tool-kits—RoomWorks is one of Cubase's answers to the stock, reverb plug-in.

RoomWorks itself is divided into five categories which you can see outlined on the bottom of the window. These sections are: Input Filters, Reverb Character, Damping, Envelope, and Output. Let's take a look at each of these individually to see how they work as a collective whole.

1.Input Filters: The easiest section to explain, there are two ways that RoomWorks permits the user to adjust the input routing through to the effect—frequency adjustments and gain adjustments.

a. For frequency adjustments, you are provided with a low-shelving filter as well as a high-shelving filter. The “lo” parameter will simply set how much low-end frequency is allowed through and the actual value determines where the filter begins to take effect. The high-shelving will do the opposite. Adjusting this parameter prior to any other adjustments in RoomWorks will provide you with a good foundation for future construction of your reverb.

b. For gain adjustments, you are provided with a pretty simple “low” and “high” option. If you feel you would like to boost some of the lows or highs, here is a good place to do it. It is important to note that these values are linked to the input filter values mentioned above and, as such, work in tandem to provide a well-rounded method of manipulating the input signal prior to any reverb processing. 

2. Reverb Character: This is more than likely where you will be spending most of your time in editing your reverb. There are five primary parameters and two, minor, modulation parameters. 
     
a. Pre-Delay: This parameter determines the time it takes for any reverb to actually start. If you set this parameter to zero, the reverb will be instant and tied directly to the sound you're working on—triggering instantaneously. As you adjust this parameter higher, the reverb will take that much more time to initialize. There is no ramping—this parameter is absolute.

b. Reverb Time: This parameter is used to set how long you would like the reverb to run for once it has been activated. 

c. Size: To the average ear, this parameter adjusts exactly what its name would indicate—the size of the reverb. At smaller sizes, the reverb typically simulates more confined settings while larger sizes do the opposite and can be used to create larger spatial simulations.

d. Diffusion: This parameter is geared towards adjusting how the behavior of the end of your reverb behaves. In essence you can adjust the diffusion parameter to get a more spread out, “diffused,” effect as it fades out by having a lower value; or, you can make the reverb sound more poignant and specific—by having a higher value.

e. Width: This parameter, the last of the main parameters for adjusting the character of your reverb, adjusts simply how much of the stereo plane you would like your reverb to occupy on the spectrum from zero, mono, to 100, stereo.

f. Variation: As reverb technically deals with the reflection of sound off of objects, RoomWorks provides this parameter to quickly alter the specific reflection pattern used. This parameter is quite helpful either if you are running into an odd audio issue with your reverb that you don't think should be there or if you would like to experiment with different patterns toward creating a better reverb character.

g. Hold: Last but not least, this parameter contains the reverb, infinitely, and is typically used to create a much more elongated reverb sound, most similar to an atmospheric pad, out of the initial sound you have routed through the effect.

3. Damping: This parameter analogizes to reverb used for mastering purposes in that you can take the reverb character you have constructed and really add some more impact and detail. There are, similar to the Input Filter category, four parameters split into two groups. Damping itself typically adjusts the decay time of the reverb—here split into the low-frequency decay time and the high-frequency decay time.

a. For frequency adjustments, the “lo” parameter determines the frequency at which all the sound below the cutoff will be subject to damping; and, likewise, the “hi” parameter determines its respective counterpart. 

b. For level adjustments, both “lo” and “hi,”, you are adjusting the time of the decay itself for both frequency divisions. The “lo” level will determine the decay time of the low frequencies as set by the damping frequency adjustments above; and the “hi” level will adjust the decay time of the high frequencies. 

4. Envelope: This section of RoomWorks provides the user with even more control over the behavior of the reverb. Here, similar to an envelope on your run-of-the-mill synthesizer, the user is able to adjust the attack and release of the reverb as well as the magnitude at which these adjustments affect the reverb itself—amount.

a. Amount: This parameter simply controls how much the adjustments to the attack and release parameters actually affect the reverb created. At lower values, the envelope parameters will be less distinct and at higher values the envelope parameters will be more easily discernible.

b. Attack: Contrary to the Pre-Delay value in the Reverb Character section, this parameter controls when the reverb will initialize through continuous ramping—as opposed to the absolute cutoff of the Pre-Delay. Very similar to attack on envelopes in synthesizers; however, this parameter behaves more similarly to a noise-gate.
 
c. Release: This parameter adjusts how long it takes for the reverb to be cutoff from the perspective of both an envelope as well as the behavior of a noise-gate with peak-signal registration. 

5. Output: The last section of the RoomWorks effect plug-in contains five parameters—two primary and three secondary.

a. Mix: This parameter simply controls how much of the reverb you are allowing to contribute to the original input (the dry signal). Values that are either very low or zeroed will output a signal that is extremely dry while values that are very high or maxed out will output wetter or fully wet signals.

b. Efficiency: This parameter is provided by Steinberg for the user to have more control over how much CPU processing power is used for the RoomWorks plugin. Lower values use more CPU power and generally provide more clean, accurate sounds; however, higher values, while doing the opposite and typically creating progressively more chaotic interpretations of your settings, can sometimes lead to unique, original, and more interesting reverb.

c. Wet only: The first of the three minor parameters, this disengages RoomWorks from the mix of the dry and wet signals and only outputs a 100% wet version of the two. 

d. Export: This parameter simply notifies Cubase to utilize the highest possible CPU power for processing the reverb during any audio export. 

e. Out: This meter, the last of the RoomWorks parameters, indicates the level of the signal being routed out of the effect plug-in. 
</WRAP>
</WRAP>



